Enhancing Circuit Diagram Understanding via Near Sight Correction Using
VLMs
Shreyas Kulkarni, Vivek Kumar, Remish Leonard Minz, Munender Varshney, Thiruvengadam Samon,
Abhishek Mitra, Nikhil Kulkarni, Nilanjan Chakravortty, Prateek Mital, Kingshuk Banerjee
Research & Development Centre, Hitachi India Pvt Ltd, Bangalore, India
{shreyas.kulkarni, vivek.kumar, remish.minz, munender.varshney, thiruvengadam.s, abhishek.mitra,
nikhil.kulkarni, nilanjan.chakravortty, prateek.mital, kingshuk.banerjee}@hitachi.co.in
Abstract
Automated circuit diagram understanding is essential for
circuit digitization, circuit design verification, education
etc. Despite its practical importance, current methods
struggle with interpreting circuit diagrams reliably. Recent
advancements in Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have enabled significant progress in tasks such as Visual Question
Answering (VQA), but VLMs still fail to capture basic visual relationships, such as line or circle intersections, that
are essential in circuit schematics. In this work, We evaluate state-of-the-art VLMs for circuit diagram understanding and confirm that it face challenges in accurately identifying circuit connections. We propose Near Sight Correction (NSC), a pipeline to transform the circuit diagram into
a more meaningful and enhanced circuit diagram by utilizing key elements. This pipeline automatically labels the
connection key points in the original diagram. Thereafter
we ingest it in a VLM for circuit understanding, either directly through graph generation or through additional VQA
tasks. We evaluate our approach in three settings, (i) VQA
on circuit components, (ii) VQA on circuit connections, and
(iii) directly through graph generation. We name the three
settings as Circuit VQA, Connection VQA and Connection
Matrix Prediction task, respectively. All three settings are
evaluated on adaptations of circuitvqa dataset [14]. Circuit VQA task achieves an accuracy of 87.38%. Connection
VQA task and Connection Matrix Prediction task achieves
the best F1 scores of 0.723 and 0.8735 respectively.
1. Introduction
Automated understanding of circuit diagrams is essential
for various practical applications such as circuit diagram
digitization, automated fault detection, circuit design verification, education and training, and circuit simulations.
Conventional techniques struggle in achieve a good accuFigure 1. Example input and outputs of our pipeline. 1A is the
input 1B is the output of our key point labelling pipeline. 1C and
1D are the generate graph of 1A and 1B respectively.
racy in circuit diagram understanding. Recent advances
in AI, particularly Vision-Language Models (VLMs), offer
new possibilities for automated interpretation of complex
visual data across various tasks like visual grounding, visual
reasoning and visual question answering. VQA has gained
a lot from recent advancements in Vision Language Models (VLMs), enabling them to understand images and generate insightful responses. The combined ability of vision
and language has opened paths for novel applications in the
area of robotics, healthcare, autonomous systems and more.
VLMs, such as CLIP [15] and Flamingo [2], have demonstrated impressive capabilities in a wide range of visionlanguage tasks, from object detection to image captioning,
to even more complex multi modal reasoning tasks. However, despite their promising performance, VLMs continue
to struggle with some simple artifacts in image understandThis ICCV Workshop paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore. 4234
ing. A recent study [16] highlights that VQA on simple
objects, such as counting intersections in line diagrams or
identifying geometric relationships in intersecting circles,
remains challenging for state-of-the-art VLMs. This limitation raises concerns about their ability to handle tasks requiring fine-grained visual reasoning, such as interpreting
schematic diagrams or understanding connectivity in circuit
diagrams.
In this paper, we aim to address these challenges by exploring the application of VLMs in circuit diagram understanding. Since [16] discusses the challenges VLMs
face interpreting intersections in line diagrams, We observe
that while VLMs excel at object recognition, they struggle to identify and reason about complex spatial relationships and interconnections between electrical components
in schematic circuit diagrams. This limitation hinders their
ability to perform essential tasks in domains such as electrical engineering and circuit design. We utilize key elements
to achieve our goal, which comprise of the circuit components and the connection key points. Figure 1 shows an example input and the corresponding outputs of our pipeline.
Figure 1A shows the unlabelled input circuit diagram, while
an intermediate output of our pipeline, an automatically labelled image is shown in Figure 1B.The graph representation of the unlabelled and the labelled circuit diagram are
shown in Figure 1C and 1D respectively. The graph representation of the labelled circuit diagram correctly identifies the connections of the sample input circuit. We use
Mermaid [21] to realize the graph representation. This example highlights that understanding unlabelled circuit image as shown in Figure 1 using VLMs has limitations. To
overcome these limitation, we introduce a novel approach
called Near Sight Correction (NSC). NSC is designed for
schematic circuit diagrams and automatically labels connection key points in the images to enhance the VLM’s
ability to interpret component connectivity. By explicitly
marking these key points, our method improves the VLM’s
capacity to understand the semantic connections between
components, ultimately resulting in better performance in
circuit diagram understanding and downstream tasks such
as Vision Question Answering for these enhanced circuit
diagrams. Our experiments demonstrate that the NSC approach significantly improves circuit diagram understanding. The results highlight NSC’s effectiveness in enhancing
the capabilities of VLMs, enabling them to more effectively
reason about complex visual relationships in specialized domains when key points are provided in the input images.
Our approach addresses key challenges in automated circuit understanding, paving the way for more accurate and
reliable Vision-Language systems for specialized tasks. We
created three datasets for the CircuitVQA, ConnectionVQA
and Connection Matrix prediction task. We intend to make
these datasets public.
2. Literature Survey
2.1. Circuti Diagram Understanding
The early work of automated circuit diagram understanding primarily focused on circuit recognition. One such
early study from the pre-machine learning era [5], in which
the authors partitioned the recognition problem into three
sub-tasks: identifying nodes, components, and connections.
All three sub-problems were addressed using pixel-based
methods. Nodes and components were segmented by applying an appropriate threshold on a spatially varying object pixel density, while connection paths were traced using
pixel stacks.
In the early 2000, with the widespread use of tablet PCs and
other pen input devices, research toward automated circuit
understanding focused on sketches on such devices. These
works use techniques such as pen stroke, pixel gradient, and
visual based features to recognize nodes, components and
connections from such digitized sketches [6–8] .
Later on deep learning approaches were use to extract features directly form the input images. [13] was one of the
early work credited for using convolution neural network to
learn the definition of visual objects. Recent works such
as [9] and [3] attempt to give a complete pipeline for understanding and digitizing analog circuits. Both approaches
use YOLO for the detection of components and text, while
Histogram of oriented gradients (HOG) based features are
used to identify the connections.
[14] is closest to our work where the circuit understanding is done using Vision language models (VLM). It performs well in identifying circuit components, however, the
emphasis on identifying connections is limited. The circuit
components and connections understanding are done using
VQA which uses vision modality and language to provide a
natural language output for a given question. The authors
release a dataset, which has a schematic and handdrawn
electrical circuit. This dataset comprise of a collection of
multiple small datasets and one hand drawn dataset, named
CGHD [20]. The recent advancement of Transformers, enable us to utilize VLMs such as LLaVA [12], InstructBLIP
[4] and GPT4V [1] on VQA datasets which shows remarkable performance. Still these work does not focus on the
connections while AI2D for diagrams [11] which identify
the structure and the semantics of its constituents and their
relationships in the form of Diagram Parse Graphs (DPG).
3. NSC Framework
We propose a Near Sight Correction(NSC) framework that
takes a digital image of a schematic circuit diagram as input,
i.e., an analog electrical circuit, and then automatically annotates the key points in the schematic diagram. Our framework comprise of seven step process, as described in this
section. In an abstract view, steps one through four achieve
4235
the automated key point awareness. Step six performs the
accurate schematic diagram understanding with the help of
the key point aware circuit images and represents that understanding in a graph form using Mermaid [21], which
is expressive enough to describe any analog schematic diagram and simple enough to be accurately generated by the
VLMs. Figure 2 shows all five steps, where steps one and
two are abstracted as one block. The final step, step seven,
performs the VQA task using the graph representation of
the circuit diagram and the key point aware analog circuit
image, which is the output of step two.
Figure 2. Proposed Framework NSC
Steps one through five are the key contributions of this
work. Step one performs the object detection task on the
schematic diagram, where the class objects are broadly classified into circuit components and connection key points.
Step two performs the edge detection, label localization,
and font size normalization. Step three removes the components and texts from the image and identify the line
segments using Hough transformation. Step four identified equipotential junctions by identifying junctions on connected segments such that segments where there is no component between junctions. Step five does the equipotential
label refinement where the equipotential points are assigned
same label. Figure 3 shows the flow diagram of the above
five steps.
Figure 3. Proposed automated annotation pipeline.
3.1. Key elements localization
Our proposed pipeline uses an automated labelling process
to help the vision language model (VLM) for semantic understanding of the diagram to give a relevant answer to the
question asked. The key element localization is achieved
using the widely used YOLOv8 object detection model
[17, 19].
3.1.1. Annotation of key elements
To understand the connections and spatial correlation in a
circuit image, we have annotated all the schematic circuit
images in the CircuitVQA dataset [14] for 3-way and 4-way
Junctions, Cross-over, and terminals. At the same time, the
remaining annotations of components are already available
in the dataset. All these annotation classes are key elements
in the comprehensive understanding of circuits, while the
prior four classes are key points of the circuit representing
the connection details among the components. The total
number of classes thus formed is 63 for schematic analog
circuits and 70 for the complete set of schematic circuit images comprising both analog and digital. We use the CVAT
tool [18] to annotate all these schematic circuit images. After manually annotating the images using the CVAT platform, we obtained the annotations in the YOLOv8 Detection 1.0 format.
3.2. Fine-Tuning Yolov8 for Localizing key elements
The preprocessed manual annotations of these key elements
are used for training the Yolov8 object detection model to
localize all key elements in the circuit using a bounding box.
We have taken a pre-trained YOLOv8 model, which has
been fine-tuned for schematic analog circuit images, a complete set of schematic images, a hand-drawn CGHD dataset,
and a circuitvqa dataset. The number of classes varies based
on the dataset used as the many components in digital circuit are not present in analog dataset such as OR, AND,
NAND and XOR. So, the set of classes is in the range of 63
or 70, as discussed above. The trained model can now localize various components and key points for the semantic
and spatial understanding of the diagram. The classes localized by the model include resistors, capacitors, inductors,
current sources, and voltage sources, to name a few. Since
our main research focus is a comprehensive understanding
of circuits by identifying the connections between the components, we decided to go ahead with a simple set of analog circuit components. We have split the 75% dataset for
training, 10% validation, and the remaining 15% for testing. We reckon the VLMs lack the global view of the image
while answering any given question in a VQA task. We test
this by asking questions about closely connected components in a smaller region of the entire input circuit image
against the components that are sparsely connected. We
observe a better answer for the closely connected compo4236
nents. To provide a general solution in this setting, we use
our Yolov8 to get an enhanced image with localized components and key points using a bounding box, which improves
the VLM’s comprehensive understanding. This fine-tuned
model achieves a map50 accuracy of 0.87074 with a precision and recall of 0.87464 and 0.8091, respectively.
3.3. Automatic Key Point Labelling
In Automatic key point labelling step we iterate through
each of the connection key point inferred in the key point
localization step, such as the junctions, cross-overs, terminals and even corners. Each of these inferred objects has
a bounding box. To automatically label a connection key
point, we pick one inference at a time. The bounding box
of this inference is measured. Another box, called the label
box is used to place the label. The label box is of the same
size as the inferred bounding box of the key point. This
label box is convolved around the inferred bounding box
with the criteria, that if there is any edge inside the label
box, then the space spawned by the label box is not fit for
automatic labelling. In such a situation, we go ahead with
the convolution step per pixel and check the criteria again.
Only, at the first instance, when there is no edge withing
the label box, we go ahead and place an alphanumeric label
within the label box.
3.4. Equipotential Label Refinement
Once we label the junctions with labels. There are three
sub steps called the line segment localization, equipotential junction identification and equipotential label refinement. In line segment localization, we remove the components and the text from the image and apply Hough transformation to identify the line segment in the input image.
In the next step we identify the junctions on the connected
segments. We check whether there is any line identified
by Hough transformation connecting two junctions and no
components between them. If we find such junction pairs
we mark them as equipotential. In the equipotential label
refinement step we redistribute the labels assigned to the
junctions such that equipotential junctions have the same
label. After each key points are covered, we supplement additional steps of normalization on the labels based on size.
For instance, Out of all the annotation box containing alphabetic annotation of different sizes, we scale all of them
to the one having the largest size. This ensures that all the
annotations are of same size. We ensure that the font size of
the label is maximum with respect to the label box size.
3.5. Graph Understanding through VLM
In this step we provide the image with key point labelling to
the VLM and prompt it to generate a graph representation of
the schematic diagram. The graph representation we choose
is mermaid code representation [21]. This is because, mermaid is very simple to represent connected components of
any domain, yet is expressive enough to represent any circuit. We use one shot prompting technique to query VLMs
to generate mermaid code. Figure 1C and Figure 1D shows
the graph visualization of the mermaid code generated for
the circuit diagram shown in Figure 1A and Figure 1B respectively.
3.6. VQA Task
This is the forth and the final step of our pipeline. In this
step we perform the VQA task on the Key point-aware analog circuit images. Hear also we use one shot prompting
technique to query VLMs to get the answer to the VQA
question by providing the image in both labelled and unlabelled setting along with the corresponding mermaid code
generated in step 3.
4. Experimental Results
In this section we present the datasets and the experimental
results of the various stages of our research. Starting from
preliminary experimentation to test the ability of VLMs to
perform VQA on circuit images. The experimental results
of automatically labelling the circuit images to make it key
point aware, followed by the improvement achieved by our
NSC approach results.
4.1. Datasets
We have four datasets, all are adaptations of circuitvqa [14],
Table 1 shows all the four datasets. Circuit-VQA1 dataset
is the complete circuitvqa’s [14] test dataset which consists
of 1145 images (hand drawn + schematic) of both analog
and digital circuits. Over these images total 23313 datapoints exist in this dataset. We show samples of two datapoints in table 2. While performing manual analysis over
randomly sampled datapoints in Circuit-VQA1 dataset, we
observed the mismatch between ‘true answer’ of question
and ground truth values mentioned in the Circuit-VQA1.
Therefore, to get accuracy results, we decided to manually
correct the ground truth values of a small subset and rerun the experiments on it. We sampled 175 images from
Circuit-VQA1 (schematic + analog) at random and manually rectified corresponding QA pairs from Circuit-VQA1.
This led to Circuit-VQA2 dataset of 1615 datapoints on 175
images. The Circuit-VQA1 dataset does not contain questions (schematic circuits) for evaluating the VLM’s ability
to identify component interconnections within a circuit diagram. Therefore, we created a new dataset for the connections. We did this by sampling 275 images from CircuitVQA1 (schematic + analog) at random and manually construct the QA pairs on those 275 images, thus creating
Connection-VQA dataset, which has 1025 datapoints. The
last dataset we constructed is the Connection Matrix dataset.
4237
This dataset targets the VLM’s capability to understand the
presence or absence of a connection in a circuit. Connection Matrix dataset comprise of 3457 possible datapoints,
or connections between any two components over 50 circuit images.
Table 1. Datasets
Dataset Name Description
Circuit-VQA 1 Complete circuitvqa [14] test dataset
Circuit-VQA 2 175 images containing 1615 corrected data points
Connection-VQA 275 images containing 1025 connection data points
Connection-Matrix 50 images containing 3457 possible connection data
points
Table 2. Connection-VQA Dataset Samples
Question Answer
Do 3ohm and 3ohm make direct electrical connection with each other? Yes
Do 3F, 3F and 2ohm make direct electrical connection with each other? No
4.2. Experiment Pipelines
We have six experiment pipelines. Each experiment
pipeline is derived from the proposed framework shown in
Figure 2. Figure 4 shows six derived pipelines. The first
pipeline shown in Figure 4(1) is the one where VQA task
is performed on unlabelled images directly. The second
pipeline shown in Figure 4(2) is the one, where first mermaid code of unlabeled circuit diagram is generated through
VLM which acts as additional prompt while performing
VQA task.
4.3. VLM Prompts
Depending upon the task and experimental pipeline, variety
of prompts are used. To generate mermaid code through
VLM for unlabeled (original) images, the prompt used is:
"You are expert of electrical circuit
diagrams. Generate mermaid code for
this electrical circuit diagram. Do
not give any additional information
in the output. The objective of
the mermaid code is to understand
all electrical components such as
resistors, capacitor, current sources
etc. and to understand how these
components are connected to each
other."
To generate mermaid code through VLM for labeled
images, the prompt used is as follows.
"You are expert of electrical circuit
diagrams. Generate mermaid code for
this electrical circuit diagram. Do
Figure 4. Proposed automated annotation pipeline.
not give any additional information
in the output. The objective of
the mermaid code is to understand
all electrical components such as
resistors, capacitor, current sources
etc. and to understand how these
components are connected to each other.
To help you in understanding of these
connections, we have labeled some of
locations or connection nodes as ’J1’,
’J2’, ’J3’ etc. in red color. The
nodes with same label are electrically
identical."
To perform CircuitVQA task over images without any
mermaid, the prompt used is as follows.
"You are expert of electrical circuit
diagrams. The task is to answer the
following questions based on this
image."
To perform CircuitVQA task over images with corresponding mermaid code, the prompt used is as follows.
4238
"You are expert of electrical circuit
diagrams. The approximate mermaid code
for attached electrical/digital circuit
diagram image is: {}. The task is to
answer the following questions based on
this mermaid code and image."
To perform ConnectionVQA over images without any
mermaid, the prompt used is:
"You are expert of electrical circuit
diagrams. The task is to answer the
electrical connection related questions
based on this image. You can consider
following guidelines while answering
the questions: 1. There exists a
direct electrical connection between
2 components if they are connected to
each other by ONLY wire (no in between
component). 2. There exists a direct
electrical connection between 2 or more
components if they all are connected to
one common junction point or node. The
question is as follows:"
To perform ConnectionVQA over images with mermaid code, the prompt used is:
"You are an expert of electrical
circuit diagrams. The approximate
mermaid code for attached
electrical/digital circuit diagram
image is: {}. The task is to answer
the electrical connections related
questions based on this image and
the mermaid code. You can consider
following guidelines while answering
the questions: "There exists a direct
electrical connection between 2 or more
components if they all are connected
to one common junction point or node in
the mermaid code." The question is as
follows:"
4.4. Experiments
This section lists out all the experiments.
4.4.1. Sample Outputs for sub tasks
Our proposed approach generates automatically labeled images from unlabeled (original) images. Figure 1B shows the
labeled version of 1A. The mermaid code generated for images through VLM can be visualized through online mermaid editor tool. The mermaid visualization for circuit in
1A is shown in 1C. Similarly, the mermaid visualization for
circuit in 1B is shown in 1D. One can observe that mermaid
generated for labeled images is relatively accurate as compared to mermaid for unlabeled image. For this research
work, we have ignored the arrow directions in mermaid.
4.4.2. Experiment 1 (CircuitVQA task)
As a task to replicate the results mentioned in CircuitVQA
paper, we used Circuit-VQA1 dataset and experimented
with Pipeline1 using top performing VLMs as per VLM
leaderboard dated Aug 2024. The objective of this experiment was to track the capability enhancement of off-theshelf VLMs as they are continuously being updated. The
results are shown in Table 3 with GPT4o being the standout
winner.
Table 3. CircuitVQA task results
Dataset1, Pipeline 1
VLM VQA Accuracy
Llava7b-1.6-vic-q8 (Open Source) 34.66%
InternVL2-4B (Open Source) 38.92%
GPT-4o (Closed Source) 49.87%
4.4.3. Experiment 2 (CircuitVQA task)
Although the proposed approach of automated labeling is
targeted towards improving the connection interpretation
ability of VLMs, we decided to check its side effect while
answering other types of questions such as count, position, values mentioned in CircuitVQA. This time we used
the Circuit-VQA2 and experimented with four experimental pipelines. The corresponding results are shown in Table
4. With change of experimental pipeline, the accuracy results vary within the range of ± 3% and this trend is common across top 3 closed-source VLMs (Feb 2025) however
no experimental pipeline turns out to be clear winner.
Table 4. CircuitVQA task results
Dataset2; VQA Accuracy %
Experiment Pipeline Claude
Sonnet
3.5
GPT4o
Feb 2025
Gemini
2.0 flash
Pipeline 1: No labels
+No mermaid
78.50 80.79 84.48
Pipeline 2: No labels +
mermaid
78.35 81.14 84.71
Pipeline 3: labels + No
mermaid
76.96 78.60 86.93
Pipeline 4: labels + mermaid
76.76 79.25 87.38
4.4.4. Experiment 3 (ConnectionVQA task)
Now we turn to evaluation of our proposed approach for
connection-based dataset i.e. Connection-VQA. We Experimented with four pipelines on Connection-VQA with eval4239
uation metric as F1 score since answers are binary in nature
as shown in Table 2. The corresponding results are shown
in Table 5.
Table 5. ConnectionVQA task results
Dataset3; VQA F1 score
Experiment Pipeline Claude
Sonnet
3.5
GPT4o
Feb 2025
Gemini
2.0 flash
Pipeline 1: No labels
+No mermaid
0.634 0.610 0.647
Pipeline 2: No labels +
mermaid
0.582 0.678 0.632
Pipeline 3: labels + No
mermaid
0.588 0.537 0.557
Pipeline 4: labels + mermaid
0.723 0.635 0.534
The Claude Sonnet 3.5 achieves the overall best numerical result with an F1 score of 0.723 using Pipeline 4, which
is significantly higher than the F1 score of 0.634 obtained
with Pipeline 1 for the same model. This result points to
conclusion that proposed approach of automated labeling
along with use of VLM generated mermaid significantly
improves VLMs ability to interpret the connections. However, this observation is not consistent across other VLMs.
Therefore, we decided to perform deeper analysis of the
images, their mermaid codes generated through VLMs and
VLMs ability to interpret the image and mermaid together
as explained in Experiment 4.
4.4.5. Experiment 4 (Connection matrix prediction task)
The inconsistency observed in experiment 3 results lead to
the intermediate output analysis of our experiments. There
could be 2 possible sources of error coming from VLMs.
First, VLMs are not able to produce highly accurate mermaid codes. Second, VLMs are not able to analyze, and
reason based on mermaid code for given VQA query.
Let us consider Pipeline 5 and Pipeline 6 for investigation where VQA part is removed and only the mermaid generation part of unlabelled and labelled images is considered.
To evaluate this setup, we created the connection matrix for given circuit image manually. We followed systematic nomenclature to deal with terminal positions and
same value components while writing the connection matrix. The sample connection matrix for circuit shown in
Fig.1 is shown in Fig.5. If terminals of two different components are connected to each other, then that matrix position
is filled with 1. We further created the connection matrix
for VLM predicted mermaid codes manually. The predicted
connection matrices are compared with true connection matrix to quantify the accuracy of mermaid generation.
This experiment was performed on Connection Matrix
dataset with Pipeline5 and Pipeline6 and results are shown
in Table 6 and 7. Table 6 shows the percentage of the number of images in which all the connections are identified
correctly, against total number of images in dataset. First
Figure 5. Samaple Connection Matrix
row shows the percentage for pipeline 5, where the input
images have no label and second row shows the percentage
for pipeline 6, where input images have labels.
The connection prediction performance through the mermaid code is drastically high for labeled images compared
to unlabeled images across all VLMs. Therefore we present
a deeper metric for the results of labelled images.
We calculate the F1 score for the connection matrix using pipeline 6 for labelled images, by considering all the
possible connections in a circuit. A generated mermaid
code, when represented as a connection matrix, looks like
Figure 5. All the connection space in the upper triangular
matrix of the figure are the possible connections available,
for example the possible connections in Figure 5 is 60. If
the generated mermaid’s connects match with the one’s in
the ground truth matrix, we count it as true positive, if the
generated mermaid’s connection does not match with the
one’s in the ground truth matrix, we count it as false positive. We sum up the true positives, false positives, true negatives and false negatives to get the F1 Score for each of the
three VLMs. The cumulatively total possible connections in
the dataset are 3457. Since Connection-Matrix is subset of
Connection-VQA, let us observe the results of Experiment
3 over Connection-Matrix as shown in Table 8.
Table 6. Connection matrix results
Dataset4;Mermaid, Percentage
Experiment Pipeline Claude
Sonnet
3.5
GPT4o
Feb 2025
Gemini
2.0 flash
Pipeline5: No labels + mermaid 2% 4% 2%
Pipeline6: labels + mermaid 54%, 60% 62%
Table 7. Connection matrix results
Dataset4,Mermaid, F1 score
Experiment Pipeline Claude
Sonnet
3.5
GPT4o
Feb 2025
Gemini
2.0 flash
Pipeline6: labels + mermaid
0.8735 0.872 0.77
By observing the Table 6 and table 8 together one can
conclude Tables 6, 7 and 8 show that, VLMs can generate
the mermaid codes with high accuracy when input images
are appropriately labelled. However, VLMs have the limi4240
tations in analyzing this connection information in mermaid
codes while performing VQA task.
Literature [10] backs the relative performance of Claude
model against GPT4o and Gemini2.0. Claude model is considered superior over GPT4o and Gemini2.0 for analytical
reasoning tasks. It is evident here since Claude shows relatively best performance on Connection VQA even though it
preforms relatively poor in accurate mermaid generation.
Table 8. ConnectionVQA task results
Dataset4,VQA, F1 score
Experiment Pipeline Claude
Sonnet
3.5
GPT4o
Feb 2025
Gemini
2.0 flash
Pipeline4: labels + mermaid
0.818 0.656 0.273
5. Conclusions
In this work, we address the diagram understanding from
a holistic point of view, such as relative spatial localization and various connection joints. We have proposed an
NSC pipeline to enhance the circuit image, which labels all
the key elements such as components, junctions, terminals,
etc. This enhancement is crucial for the analysis of analog
electric circuits specifically in connection identification and
visualizing them using mermaid. We show a better comprehension ability of VLM using our NSC pipeline approach
with the VQA task. We also derived multiple datasets for
various experimental setups to quantify the performance related to connections and component labelling. To assert
the NSC based quantitative performance, we have also proposed the Connection VQA task and the Connection matrix
prediction task, which achieve the best F1 scores of 0.723
and 0.8735, respectively.
6. Acknowledgement
We would like to acknowledge the valuable assistance of
three interns who contributed significantly to the manual
data annotation for most of the experiments. Their work
included annotating additional key elements such as 3-way
and 4-way junctions. Furthermore, they played a crucial
role in the creation of datasets for Circuit VQA, Connection
VQA, and the Connection Matrix. The interns—Tanmay
Kukreja, Sambit Kumar Mitra, and Prachi Parakh—worked
with our organization during the course of this study.
References
[1] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida,
Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al.
Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774,
2023. 2
[2] Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine
Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, Roman Ring,
Eliza Rutherford, Serkan Cabi, Tengda Han, Zhitao Gong,
Sina Samangooei, Marianne Monteiro, Jacob L Menick,
Sebastian Borgeaud, Andy Brock, Aida Nematzadeh, Sahand Sharifzadeh, Mikoł aj Binkowski, Ricardo Barreira, ´
Oriol Vinyals, Andrew Zisserman, and Karen Simonyan. ´
Flamingo: a visual language model for few-shot learning. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages
23716–23736. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022. 1
[3] Bharat Bohara and Harish S Krishnamoorthy. Deep learningbased framework for power converter circuit identification
and analysis. IEEE Access, 2024. 2
[4] Wenliang Dai, Junnan Li, D Li, AMH Tiong, J Zhao,
W Wang, B Li, P Fung, and S Hoi. Instructblip: Towards general-purpose vision-language models with instruction tuning. arxiv 2023. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06500, 2,
2023. 2
[5] Chandran V Edwards B. Machine recognition of hand-drawn
circuit diagrams. In International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP), page 3618–3621,
2000. 2
[6] Leslie Gennari, Levent Burak Kara, Thomas F. Stahovich,
and Kenji Shimada. Combining geometry and domain
knowledge to interpret hand-drawn diagrams. Computers
Graphics, 29(4):547–562, 2005. 2
[7] Leslie Gennari, Levent Burak Kara, Thomas F Stahovich,
and Kenji Shimada. Combining geometry and domain
knowledge to interpret hand-drawn diagrams. Computers &
Graphics, 29(4):547–562, 2005.
[8] Frans CA Groen, Arthur C Sanderson, and John F Schlag.
Symbol recognition in electrical diagrams using probabilistic
graph matching. Pattern Recognition Letters, 3(5):343–350,
1985. 2
[9] D. Hemker, J. Maalouly, H. Mathis, R. Klos, and E. Ravanan.
From schematics to netlists – electrical circuit analysis using
deep-learning methods. Advances in Radio Science, 22:61–
75, 2024. 2
[10] Cornelia Caragea Eduard Dragut Longin Jan Latecki
Huitong Pan, Qi Zhang. Flowlearn: Evaluating large visionlanguage models on flowchart understanding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.05183v1, 2024. 8
[11] Aniruddha Kembhavi, Mike Salvato, Eric Kolve, Minjoon
Seo, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Ali Farhadi. A diagram is
worth a dozen images. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2016:
14th European Conference, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
October 11–14, 2016, Proceedings, Part IV 14, pages 235–
251. Springer, 2016. 2
[12] Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee.
Visual instruction tuning. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 36, 2024. 2
[13] Levent Burak Kara Luoting Fu. Recognizing network-like
hand-drawn sketches: A convolutional neural network approach. In International Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering
Conference, pages 671–681, 2010. 2
4241
[14] Rahul Mehta, Bhavyajeet Singh, Vasudeva Varma, and Manish Gupta. Circuitvqa: A visual question answering dataset
for electrical circuit images. In Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in
Databases, pages 440–460. Springer, 2024. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
[15] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya
Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry,
Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen
Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. Learning transferable visual
models from natural language supervision. In Proceedings
of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning,
pages 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021. 1
[16] Pooyan Rahmanzadehgervi, Logan Bolton, Mohammad Reza Taesiri, and Anh Totti Nguyen. Vision language
models are blind. In Proceedings of the Asian Conference
on Computer Vision (ACCV), pages 18–34, 2024. 2
[17] Dillon Reis, Jordan Kupec, Jacqueline Hong, and Ahmad
Daoudi. Real-time flying object detection with yolov8. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.09972, 2023. 3
[18] Boris Sekachev, Nikita Manovich, Maxim Zhiltsov, Andrey Zhavoronkov, Dmitry Kalinin, Ben Hoff, TOsmanov,
Dmitry Kruchinin, Artyom Zankevich, DmitriySidnev, Maksim Markelov, Johannes, Mathis Chenuet, a andre, telenachos, Aleksandr Melnikov, Jijoong Kim, Liron Ilouz, Nikita
Glazov, Priya, Rush Tehrani, Seungwon Jeong, Vladimir
Skubriev, Sebastian Yonekura, vugia truong, zliang, lizhming, and Tritin Truong. opencv/cvat: v1.1.0. 2020. 3
[19] Juan Terven, Diana-Margarita Cordova-Esparza, and Julio- ´
Alejandro Romero-Gonzalez. A comprehensive review of ´
yolo architectures in computer vision: From yolov1 to
yolov8 and yolo-nas. Machine learning and knowledge extraction, 5(4):1680–1716, 2023. 3
[20] Felix Thoma, Johannes Bayer, Yakun Li, and Andreas Dengel. A public ground-truth dataset for handwritten circuit
diagram images. In International Conference on Document
Analysis and Recognition, pages 20–27. Springer, 2021. 2
[21] J.M. B Yoshi G, Areal T. Mermaid ai. https://www.
mermaidchart.com/mermaid-ai?gad_source=
1, 2025. 2, 3, 4
4242