VeriGraphi: A Multi-Agent Framework of
Hierarchical RTL Generation for Large Hardware
Designs
1
st Sazzadul Islam
Dept. of Computer Science & Eng.
University of South Florida
Tampa, Florida, United States
sazzadulislam@usf.edu
2
nd Tasnim Tabassum
Dept. of Computer Science & Eng.
University of South Florida
Tampa, Florida, United States
tasnimtabassum@usf.edu
3
rd Hao Zheng
Dept. of Computer Science & Eng.
University of South Florida
Tampa, Florida, United States
haozheng@usf.edu
Abstract—Generating synthesizable Verilog for large, hierarchical hardware designs remains a significant challenge for large
language models (LLMs), which struggle to replicate the structured reasoning that human experts employ when translating
complex specifications into RTL. When tasked with producing hierarchical Verilog, LLMs frequently lose context across
modules, hallucinate interfaces, fabricate inter-module wiring,
and fail to maintain structural coherence—failures that intensify
as design complexity grows and specifications involve informal
prose, figures, and tables that resist direct operationalization. To
address these challenges, we present VeriGraphi, a framework
that introduces a spec-anchored Knowledge Graph as the central
architectural substrate driving the RTL generation pipeline.
VeriGraphi constructs a Hierarchical Design Architecture (HDA),
a structured knowledge graph that explicitly encodes module
hierarchy, port-level interfaces, wiring semantics, and intermodule dependencies as first-class graph entities and relations.
Built through iterative multi-agent analysis of the original specification, this Knowledge Graph provides a deterministic, machinecheckable structural scaffold before code generation. Guided by
the KG, a progressive coding module incrementally generates
pseudo-code and synthesizable RTL while enforcing interface
consistency and dependency correctness at each submodule
stage. We evaluate VeriGraphi on a benchmark comprising
three representative specification documents published by the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and their
corresponding implementations, and we present a RISC-V 32I
processor as a detailed case study to illustrate the full pipeline.
The results demonstrate that VeriGraphi enables reliable hierarchical RTL generation with minimal human intervention
for RISC-V, marking a significant milestone for LLM-generated
hardware design while maintaining strong functional correctness.
Index Terms—LLM, Hierarchical Hardware Designs, Verilog
Code Generation, Hierarchy, Automation, Knowledge Graph
(KG), Automation
I. INTRODUCTION
The rapid growth of large language models (LLMs) has
significantly accelerated the adoption of artificial intelligence
(AI) across diverse application domains, leading to an increasing imbalance between the pace of AI software innovation and
the rate of underlying hardware advancement. While hardware
remains the fundamental enabler of scalable and energyefficient AI systems, progress in hardware design automation
continues to lag due to the intrinsic complexity of hardware
architectures and the heavy reliance on human expertise. As a
result, scalable chip design has emerged as a critical bottleneck
in supporting the momentum of AI-driven innovation.
Recent advances show that state-of-the-art LLMs can automate substantial portions of the software development pipeline,
including the generation of syntactically correct and semantically meaningful code in high-level programming languages
such as Python and C++, even for modular and object-oriented
designs [1], [2]. Conversely, applying LLMs to hardware
description language (HDL) generation –particularly Verilog—
remains substantially more challenging. Hardware designs are
inherently hierarchical, structurally constrained, and timingsensitive, requiring precise coordination among modules, interfaces, and signals. LLMs struggle to reliably generate
complex hierarchical Verilog while maintaining both syntactic
correctness and functional fidelity, especially for rarely implemented or highly specialized designs [3]–[5]. Consequently,
human intervention is often required to resolve hallucinations,
misaligned hierarchies, and incorrect wiring decisions.
A fundamental limitation arises from the gap between the
unstructured nature of real-world hardware specification documents and the requirements of HDL generation. Specifications
are typically lengthy PDF documents that contain informal
text, tables, figures, and equations, making it difficult for
LLMs to directly extract and operationalize design intent
[5]. Flat prompting further exacerbates this issue, frequently
causing LLMs to lose context, fabricate missing structural
details, or incorrectly infer module connectivity when tasked
with generating Verilog directly from specifications.
To address these challenges, recent research has explored
hierarchical prompting and agent-based multi-stage generation pipelines for LLM-assisted hardware design, aiming
to decompose complex specifications into manageable submodules and iteratively refine RTL implementations [3], [5],
[6]. Beyond hierarchical decomposition, emerging efforts investigate graph-based representations to explicitly model architectural entities and relationships within specifications or
RTL designs, enabling systematic reasoning for tasks such
arXiv:2604.14550v2 [cs.AR] 19 Apr 2026
as assertion generation, architecture-to-RTL translation, and
neighborhood-aware retrieval [7]–[9]. In parallel, retrievalaugmented and summarization-oriented systems, such as NotebookLM, demonstrate strong capability in extracting and organizing information from Verilog specifications; however, these
tools primarily support document understanding rather than
synthesis-oriented, agentic RTL generation [10]. Although
these directions collectively advance LLM-assisted hardware
design, challenges remain in achieving tightly integrated
structural representations that ensure deterministic hierarchy
construction, interface consistency, and end-to-end traceability
within the generation pipeline.
Motivated by these limitations, we propose a structured
knowledge-graph–driven pipeline that serves as a unifying
architectural substrate across specification analysis and RTL
generation. Instead of relying on text-centric plans or post-hoc
structural recovery, our approach constructs a spec-anchored
knowledge graph that explicitly captures hierarchy, interfaces,
and inter-module relationships prior to code generation. This
explicit hierarchy breaks a complex RTL task into smaller
module-level problems that are easier to generate and revise
for LLMs, while also supporting bottom-up verification for
earlier bug identification and clearer fault localization before
full-system integration. At the same time, the resulting structured representation enables deterministic integration and consistent interface modeling by reducing implicit structural inference during generation. Furthermore, the knowledge graph
supports organized reasoning and cross-stage traceability as
the design evolves. In this manner, the knowledge graph
functions as an LLM-friendly architectural plan within an endto-end pipeline.
The main contributions of this work are summarized below:
• We propose a spec-anchored Knowledge Graph
(KG)–driven RTL generation framework integrating architectural analysis, hierarchical modeling, and progressive coding within a unified agentic pipeline, where the
KG is an intermediate representation encoding modules,
ports, signals, and hierarchical relations through explicit
semantic edges, enabling module-level validation and deterministic structural integration prior to RTL generation.
• We design a KG-guided progressive coding mechanism
that incrementally generates pseudo-code and synthesizable RTL while enforcing dependency correctness, and
structural alignment with the graph model.
• We evaluate VeriGraphi through both synthesizability
and functional correctness, using specification-driven testbenches for module-level and integration-level validation.
Our results show successful generation of complex designs, including RV32I with minimal human intervention
and HMAC with zero intervention, while achieving significantly fewer coding iterations, and thus lower generation cost, than prior work.
II. RELATED WORK
A. LLM-Driven RTL Generation Pipelines
Prior work has explored hierarchical and agent-based
prompting strategies for LLM-assisted hardware design.
ROME [6] introduced hierarchical prompting for decomposing
large designs into submodules and demonstrated one of the
earliest LLM-generated processors. However, its human-driven
hierarchical prompting (HDHP) mode depends on expertprovided decompositions, while its purely generative hierarchical prompting (PGHP) mode is fragile for rarely implemented
designs; in both cases, top-level wiring and interface integration remain largely dependent on the LLM. HiVeGen [3]
improves scalability through hierarchical generation, module
reuse, and runtime structural correction, but it still relies on
predefined templates and application-oriented inputs such as
LLVM-based extraction from C/C++ kernels, which limits direct use on arbitrary PDF specifications. ChatCPU [11] demonstrates strong results for CPU design by combining fine-tuned
LLMs with a processor description language and verification
flow, but it is tightly coupled to predefined CPU templates and
a domain-specific specification format. Spec2RTL-Agent [5]
further advances automation through a multi-agent workflow
for spec analysis, code generation, and debugging, yet its
intermediate plan remains text-centric rather than machinecheckable, making structural verification and cross-stage error
attribution difficult. Overall, existing RTL-generation pipelines
improve decomposition and refinement, but still face common
limitations in deterministic hierarchy construction, explicit
interface modeling, and reliable top-level integration.
B. Graph-Based & Retrieval-Augmented Hardware Reasoning
AssertionForge [7] introduces a knowledge-graph workflow
for formal verification by extracting entities from naturallanguage specifications and refining them with structural information from existing RTL. This improves assertion generation,
but its KG construction assumes RTL is already available
and is aimed at verification-time context synthesis rather than
spec-first RTL generation. VeriRAG [9] combines hardware
knowledge graphs with vector retrieval to provide symbolic
and semantic context for Verilog and SVA generation, demonstrating the value of retrieving structured neighborhoods instead of injecting flat prompt contexts. However, its graph
is primarily built from an RTL corpus and depends on curated retrieval coverage, which can weaken traceability to
original specification intent and become brittle when retrieval
misses rare or novel modules. Yang et al. [8] use a neuralsymbolic blueprint graph to translate unstructured architectural
descriptions into symbolic specifications for RTL generation
and verification, showing the benefit of structured intermediate
representations over flat text. However, their blueprint graph
mainly captures high-level architectural structure and behavior,
with limited modeling of detailed port-level connectivity and
wiring constraints needed for deterministic RTL integration.
Fig. 1: System Architecture.
III. FRAMEWORK
A. Overview
To achieve an automated hardware design pipeline directly
from raw specs, we propose a structured architecture, illustrated in Fig. 1, composed of three tightly coupled modules.
Each module incrementally transforms specification-level intent into a synthesizable Verilog design, while maintaining an
organized Knowledge Graph (KG) that serves as an explicit architectural representation. The KG is constructed based on the
decomposed architecture and functional implementation plan
to enable systematic reasoning, traceability, and deterministic
module integration. The framework includes:
1) Architectural Analysis Module: This module performs
an organized interpretation of the specification document, emulating the reasoning process of a hardware expert. It analyzes
and summarizes the document, decomposes the design into
functional submodules, and formalizes their roles, interfaces,
and dependencies. The output is a detailed implementation
plan that defines the architectural blueprint for later stages.
2) Hierarchy Analysis Module: Building upon the implementation plan, this module constructs and updates the
Knowledge Graph. It captures the Device Under Test (DUT)
interface (including ports, clock/reset conventions, parameters,
and constraints) and models explicit hierarchical relationships
among submodules. Wiring semantics, interface mappings, and
structural dependencies are represented as typed graph entities
and relations, ensuring deterministic hierarchy formation and
machine-checkable connectivity.
3) Progressive Coding Module: Guided by the implementation plan and the Knowledge Graph, this module incrementally generates synthesizable Verilog code in a progressive
manner. Submodules are implemented, verified, and assembled
into the top-level design through an iterative closed-loop
process involving code generation, syntax verification, and
prompt optimization.
4) Verification Module: This module verifies the generated RTL in a staged manner, beginning with submodulelevel checking and ending with full top-module validation.
It derives specification-grounded testbenches, runs simulation
for both module-level and integration-level correctness, and
then performs synthesis and PPA evaluation; only designs that
pass both functional verification and synthesizability checks
are accepted as final outputs, while failures trigger human
intervention and further refinement.
Each module is detailed in the following subsections.
B. Architectural Analysis Module
The Architectural Analysis Module is inspired by the Iterative Understanding and Reasoning paradigm introduced in
Spec2RTL [5], where the objective is to transform lengthy,
unstructured, and LLM-unfriendly specification documents
into a structured implementation plan. Real-world hardware
specifications often contain extensive textual definition interleaved with figures, tables, and informal explanations, making
direct RTL generation unreliable. This module addresses that
challenge by iteratively organizing, extracting, and validating
essential architectural elements to produce a well-structured,
LLM-friendly implementation plan.
The module is implemented as a tightly coupled multiagent pipeline, where specialized LLM agents collaborate
to progressively refine architectural intent. The agents are
described below.
1) Summarizer Agent: Processing large PDF specifications
is challenging because figures and tables are often lost in
raw text extraction. To address this, we use a custom preprocessing pipeline that extracts both text and visual artifacts
from the specification. Text is extracted with PyPDF, while a
Python-based preprocessing tool captures figures and tables as
indexed image files (e.g., figure 1, figure 2), preserving their
original numbering and correspondence in the document. The
specification PDF and these extracted visual artifacts together
form the primary system input. Since hardware specifications
are typically organized into sections, the Summarizer Agent
generates structured summaries at section granularity. During
summarization, it reasons over the text to detect implicit or
explicit figure and table references, retrieves the corresponding
pre-extracted images, and incorporates them into the reasoning
process. This multimodal grounding helps capture structural
and architectural details conveyed through diagrams. The
output is a structured JSON summary for each section, including metadata such as referenced figures and tables, which
serves as an LLM-friendly multimodal context for downstream
decomposition and architectural analysis.
2) Decomposition Agent: Complex hardware systems inherently follow hierarchical design principles. The Decomposition Agent takes both the section-wise summaries and
the original specification content as input to systematically
identify all required sub-functions or submodules necessary
to implement the target top-level design. Beyond identifying components, the agent determines a correct implementation order by explicitly modeling inter-module dependencies,
producing an ordered and dependency-aware decomposition.
When the specification does not explicitly define a hierarchy,
the LLM is guided to infer a plausible hierarchical structure based on general architectural knowledge, which is then
exposed for optional human review and refinement. A key
aspect of this agent is its ability to associate each submodule
with precise spec reference links to relevant sections of the
original document. This allows subsequent agents to operate
on focused, context-specific excerpts rather than the full specification, significantly reducing token usage and improving
efficiency. The output is a hierarchical structural blueprint
consisting of submodules, their functional roles, dependencies,
and targeted specification references, aligned with the original
design intent.
3) Specifier Agent: Given the identified submodules and
their associated references, the Specifier Agent extracts detailed implementation-relevant information for each component. Rather than reprocessing the entire specification, it operates using the structured summaries while cross-checking with
the source document to maintain fidelity. For each submodule,
it formalizes inputs, outputs, functional behavior, constraints,
and relevant specification anchors. The agent operates in an
iterative refinement loop, updating its descriptions based on
feedback from the Content Auditor Agent to ensure completeness and consistency. The output is a structured description
suitable for downstream graph construction.
4) Content Auditor Agent: The Content Auditor Agent
reviews the generated descriptions to ensure completeness,
consistency, and alignment with the specification. It evaluates
each submodule description across four key dimensions: structural completeness (e.g., presence of all required fields such as
inputs/outputs with data types and bit widths), correctness with
respect to the specification, clarity of implementation steps,
and readiness for RTL coding. For instance, if a description
omits signal widths, provides ambiguous step ordering, or
references non-specific sections, the agent flags these as issues
and suggests concrete corrections. Based on this evaluation,
the agent produces structured feedback indicating whether the
description is valid, along with identified issues and actionable
suggestions. Descriptions that fail validation are routed back to
the Specifier Agent for refinement, while valid ones may still
receive improvement suggestions. This feedback-driven loop
ensures that each submodule description is sufficiently precise,
unambiguous, and implementation-ready before proceeding to
downstream structural modeling.
After completing these stages, the system produces a comprehensive and hierarchically organized implementation plan
for the top module and its constituent submodules. This
structured plan serves as the foundation for the subsequent
Hierarchy Analysis Module, where explicit Knowledge Graph
representations are constructed from both the original specification and the refined implementation plan.
C. Hierarchy Analysis Module
A major limitation in prior LLM-based hardware generation
is the lack of an explicit and specifiable representation of
connections between submodules when composing a top-level
design. In our experiments, we observed that accurate, detailed
connectivity becomes crucial as designs grow in complexity
and depend on multi-layer hierarchical child modules. When
such detail is missing, LLMs frequently hallucinate I/O ports,
internal signals, and wiring, leading to integration failures even
when individual submodules appear correct.
To address this, our framework introduces a KG Builder
Agent within the Hierarchy Analysis Module. It identifies the
required modules, captures their dependencies, organizes their
hierarchical relationships, and records the structural information needed for downstream code generation and assembly.
1) Hierarchical Design Architecture (HDA): The Hierarchical Design Architecture (HDA) is a design-session knowledge graph constructed by the KG Builder Agent to represent
the target design as an explicit, machine-readable hierarchy
with well-defined wiring semantics. HDA is generated using
two inputs: (1) the structured implementation plan produced
by the Architectural Analysis Module, and (2) the original
spec including section and figure references. The graph is
implemented as a property graph consisting of nodes and typed
relationships with associated key–value properties.
a) Construction Workflow (Spec-Grounded): For each
module required in the target design, the KG Builder Agent
follows a specification-grounded construction process.
Graph construction from implementation plan. The
agent builds the HDA using the structured implementation plan
together with the original specification. Based on the decomposed modules and their dependencies, it creates module nodes
and establishes hierarchical relationships.
Explicit connectivity and constraint modeling. Ports,
signals, parameters, and wiring constraints are explicitly de-
fined using information grounded in the specification and
implementation plan, rather than being inferred during code
generation. This ensures consistent and unambiguous intermodule connections. The resulting HDA forms a complete and
deterministic architectural scaffold capturing both hierarchy
and connectivity, which guides downstream RTL generation
and reduces hallucinated interfaces or incorrect wiring.
b) Graph Semantics: HDA models the target design at
module granularity while making both hierarchy and connectivity explicit.
Nodes. Each node represents a module in the architecture. Module nodes are annotated with functional descriptions, interface definitions (ports and widths), configuration
parameters, and optional references to specification sections
or figures.
Edges. Edges show structural relationships among modules:
• CONTAINS / INSTANCE OF: hierarchical relationships describing which module calls which submodule.
• DEPENDS ON: defining the inter-module dependencies.
• CONNECTS: wiring relationships describing port-tosignal connections across modules.
By explicitly encoding both hierarchy and connectivity, the
HDA provides a structural blueprint that constrains LLMdriven RTL generation and reduces the likelihood of hallucinated interfaces or wiring errors during module integration.
The constructed HDA is also saved as a JSON file, together
with reference links to the original specification sections, and
visualized graphically to enable optional human inspection
without tracing hierarchy and connectivity manually from the
full document.
D. Progressive Coding Module
With the implementation plan from the Architectural Analysis Module and the knowledge graph from the Hierarchy
Analysis Module, the pipeline proceeds to the code generation
stage, referred to as the Progressive Coding Module. This
module consists of five coordinated agents that collaboratively generate compilable, hierarchical RTL code in a staged,
bottom-up manner guided by the knowledge graph.
1) Pseudo Coder Agent: Rather than directly generating
RTL, the pipeline first produces structured hardware pseudocode. This agent takes as input both the KG node (capturing
ports, parameters, and interface constraints) and the corresponding implementation plan entry (capturing functionality
and step-wise logic). It synthesizes these into pseudocode that
explicitly defines control flow, data operations, and module behavior. This intermediate representation is critical for bridging
high-level specification and RTL, allowing structured reasoning without syntax constraints, and is stored for subsequent
use by the Coder Agent.
2) Coder Agent: The Coder Agent translates the generated
pseudocode into clean, synthesizable Verilog code. The agent
is explicitly guided to produce synthesizer-friendly RTL compatible with standard toolchains [12], including compilation
using iverilog (-g2012 -t null -Wall) and downstream synthesis.
This ensures that generated code adheres to practical hardware
design constraints beyond syntactic correctness.
3) Syntax Checker Agent: Each generated submodule is
validated using Icarus Verilog [13]. Early-stage compilation
at the submodule level ensures that errors are detected before
integration, preventing propagation across hierarchical dependencies and simplifying debugging.
4) Prompt Enhancer Agent: If compilation fails, an iterative correction loop is triggered. The Prompt Enhancer
Agent refines the generation prompt using the latest full
code, compiler error messages, and a compressed history of
previous failures. To maintain efficiency, only erroneous lines
and corresponding errors from prior iterations are retained.
This significantly reduces token usage (by approximately 80%)
while preserving essential debugging context. The refined
prompt is then used to regenerate the RTL via the Coder
Agent. This loop continues until successful compilation or a
retry limit is reached.
5) Code Assembler Agent: After all submodules are successfully generated, the Code Assembler Agent constructs the
top-level module. Using INSTANCE OF and CONNECTS
relations from the knowledge graph, it determines module
instantiations and exact port wiring to generate the hierarchical
wrapper. The assembled design is then validated through syntax checking with limited retries using direct error feedback,
ensuring a fully integrated and compilable RTL design.
The overall process follows a bottom-up generation strategy,
where modules are ordered based on hierarchy (leaf modules
first), ensuring that dependencies are resolved prior to integration. This staged approach enforces structural correctness,
improves convergence efficiency, and enables reliable generation of complex hierarchical RTL designs. The pipeline for
the Progressive Coding Module is shown in Algorithm 1.
E. Verification Module
The Verification Module is driven by a specification-based
Verifier Agent.
1) Verifier Agent: To verify the RTL generated by VeriGraphi, the Verification Agent employs Claude Sonnet 4.6
[14] to construct a specification-driven verification pipeline in
four sequential steps, grounded in the specification documents
rather than the generated RTL, ensuring testbenches serve as
independent ground truth verified against the spec.
a) Step 1 — Specification Summarization: The Verification Agent is provided the full specification PDFs as projectlevel context. For each design, it extracts a structured permodule summary covering functional role, port-level interface,
behavioral constraints, and normative requirements:
Module : <ModuleName>
Inputs : signal_a [W:0], signal_b [W:0], clk
Outputs : result [W:0]
Behavior : <Functional description from spec section>
Constraints: <Bit-width rules, valid ranges, boundary
conditions>
Spec ref : Section X.Y
This summary is constructed without reference to the RTL,
preventing test derivation from inheriting implementation-level
bugs or assumptions.
b) Step 2 — Module-Level Test Case Derivation:
Each normative behavioral claim is mapped to a concrete,
checkable condition. Boundary conditions, all-zero and all-one
patterns, spec-defined constants, and known-answer pairs are
extracted directly from the spec. For modules with undefined
RTL functions, tests are authored against spec requirements
and annotated as expected failures with documented bug
references. Representative cases:
// TC-MOD-01: All-zero inputs -> output must not be X
set(inputs=0); wait(N cycles); check("TC-MOD-01", output
!== X);
// TC-MOD-02: Spec-defined constant -> golden-path output
set(input=<spec_constant>); ...
c) Step 3 — Integration-Level Test Construction:
Integration testbenches validate end-to-end data propagation
through the full module hierarchy, focusing on pipeline depth
timing, cross-module consistency, and X-propagation detection
from broken submodules. Representative cases:
// TC-INT-01: Cold start -> full pipeline settles, no X
wait(PIPELINE_DEPTH + MARGIN); check("TC-INT-01",
top_output !== X);
// TC-INT-02: Spec-compliant inputs -> end-to-end no X
set(all inputs=<spec_values>); wait(PIPELINE_DEPTH ...
This layer provides the simulation-based pass/fail signal
determining whether the assembled top-level design requires
further iteration.
d) Step 4 — Testbench Assembly and Coverage Verification: All submodule and integration testbenches are consolidated into a single unified file with independent top-level
test modules per design, each producing parseable PASS/FAIL
output consumed by an automated shell script for compilation,
simulation, and aggregation. Coverage is verified by mapping
every normative spec clause to at least one test case—a specclause standard stronger than code-path coverage.
Spec Clause Derived Test
”If input X is all-zero, output Y
must equal the identity value.”
set(X=0); wait(N);
check("TC-MOD-0N", Y
=== );
e) Step 5 - Synthesis and PPA Evaluation: Beyond
simulation, the Verification Agent also performs synthesisbased validation. Yosys [15] is used as the primary synthesis
check, confirming that the generated RTL is synthesizable and
mapping it to a gate-level netlist. OpenLane [16] then runs the
full physical design flow, performing broad design rule checks
and reporting PPA—covering cell area, critical path delay, and
power consumption—that quantify the quality of the generated
RTL against standard physical implementation targets.
IV. CASE STUDY: RISC-V 32I PROCESSOR
We build a RISC-V 32I as a case study to demonstrate the
implementation details of our framework.
A. Case Study: Agent Pipeline for RV32I Spec Processing
To demonstrate the operation of the proposed pipeline,
we conducted a case study using the RV32I specification.
Algorithm 1: Progressive Coding Module
Input: Knowledge Graph (HDA) G = ⟨M, E⟩, Implementation Plan
Π, max retries R
Output: Synthesizable Verilog {Vm} for all m ∈ M
1 // Preprocessing
2 M ←ˆ SORTDESCTIER(M) ; // leaf modules (highest
tier) first
3 Λ ← BUILDINDEX(Π) ; // map: m.id 7→ π-entry
4 // Phase 1: Progressive Sub-module Generation
5 for each m ∈ {m′ ∈ M | ˆ τ(m′
) > 0} do
6 Pm ← PSEUDOCODER(ν(m), Λ[m]) ; // ν(m): KG
ports/params/constraints;
Λ[m]: plan functionality + steps
7 π ← PROMPTBUILD(Pm, ν(m));
8 V ← CODER(π);
9 H ← [ ]; t ← 1;
10 while t ≤ R do
11 ⟨ok, E⟩ ← SYNTAXCHECK(V ) // compilation
12 if ok then break;
13 H += ⟨t, Eˆt⟩ ; // Eˆt: erroneous lines +
error messages only
14 π ← PROMPTOPTIMIZER(π, V, E, H1:t−1) ;
// latest (V,E) in full;
H1:t−1 compressed
15 V ← CODER(π, V, E);
16 t ← t + 1;
17 Save ⟨m, V ⟩ as verified, or unverified if t > R;
18 // Phase 2: Top-level Wrapper Assembly
19 for each m ∈ {m′ ∈ M | ˆ τ(m′
) = 0} do
20 C ← 
m′
| (m′
, m) ∈ Einst	
∩ Vok ; // verified
children via KG instance_of edges
21 W ← CODEASSEMBLER(m, C, Econn) ; // parent spec
+ child Verilog + KG connects edges
22 Syntax-check W; retry up to Rw times with error feedback;
23 Save ⟨m, W⟩;
The specification document was obtained from the official
RISC-V user-level ISA documentation [17]. Since hardware
specifications are typically distributed as long PDF containing
both textual descriptions and figures, the first step involves
extracting structured information suitable for LLM processing.
The specification text was extracted using PyPDF, while
figures and tables referenced in the document were automatically captured using a custom preprocessing tool. These visual artifacts are important because architectural specifications
often encode critical information through diagrams, dataflow
representations, and lookup tables. The extracted content is
then processed by a set of coordinated LLM agents within the
Architectural Analysis Module. We have used Autogen [18]
framework for our multi-agent pipeline.
Following preprocessing, the extracted specification content
is processed by the multi-agent pipeline implemented in the
Architectural Analysis Module. All agents in this stage were
implemented using the GPT-4o-mini [19] model to balance
reasoning capability and computational efficiency during iterative analysis of large specification documents.
The first stage of the pipeline performs section-level summarization of the specification. Each section of the document
is analyzed and converted into a structured JSON summary
containing the section purpose, key technical concepts, im-
portant terminology, and cross-section dependencies. In total,
the pipeline processed 88 sections inside 238 pages of the
RISC-V specification, producing structured summaries that
provide an LLM-friendly representation of the architecture
while preserving implementation-relevant details. These summaries serve as the contextual foundation for downstream
architectural decomposition. We filter out irrelevant sections
from the summaries for the decomposition to save input
tokens.
Using both the summaries and the original specification
content, the decomposition and description stages generate
a structured implementation plan representing the RV32I
architecture as a collection of modular hardware components.
During this stage, the content auditor agent evaluates the generated module descriptions to ensure completeness, correctness, and readiness for RTL implementation. The final output
of this process is a structured JSON representation describing
each module, its interface, functionality, and implementation
constraints. An excerpt of the generated implementation plan
is shown below:
Listing 1: Simplified excerpt of the Implementation Plan
generated by Architectural Analysis Module
{
"target_function": "RISC V 32I",
"implementation_plan": [
{
"name": "RegisterFile",
"description": "Implements a register file with 32
general-purpose registers (x0 to x31) and a
program counter (pc).",
"inputs": [
"read_addr1 (5-bit)",
"read_addr2 (5-bit)"...
],
"outputs": [
"read_data1 (32-bit)",...
],
"functionality": "The RegisterFile stores 32
general-purpose registers and a program counter,
allowing for read and write operations based on
specified addresses...",
"steps": [
"1. Initialize a 32-entry array of 32-bit registers
to store the register values.",
"2. Set register x0 to zero during initialization,
ensuring it always returns zero on read....
],
"references": [
"Section 2.1",
"Figure 2.1"
],
"implementation_notes": "Ensure that the register
array is indexed correctly, with x0 hardwired to
zero. The ...",
"order": 1,
"dependencies": []
},
{
"name": "InstructionDecoder",
"description": "Decodes incoming instructions into
their respective formats (R-type, I-type, S-type,
U-type, B-type, J-type).",
"inputs": [
"instruction (32-bit)"...
This structured implementation plan is then used by
the KG Builder Agent to construct the Hierarchical
Design Architecture (HDA), a machine-readable
knowledge graph whose nodes represent hardware
modules and whose edges capture hierarchical and
wiring relationships. For RV32I, these nodes include
modules such as RISC_V_32I, RegisterFile,
InstructionDecoder, ImmediateGenerator,
ALU, ControlUnit, MemoryInterface,
HintInstructionHandler, ExtensionManager,
and VLIWSupport. Fig. 2 shows the resulting RV32I graph,
illustrating how major components are connected through
explicit structural relations. The generated HDA is stored
in JSON format and visualized through an interactive static
website.1
Fig. 2: Hierarchical Design Architecture (HDA) for RV32I.
This graph representation serves as the structural backbone
of the pipeline.
Given the structured implementation plan and the Hierarchical Design Architecture (HDA), the Progressive Coding
Module generates RTL in a staged manner. For the RV32I
case study, the Pseudo Coder Agent first produces pseudocode for each submodule. An example pseudo-code for the
ALU is shown below:
Listing 2: Pseudo-code for ALU generated by Pseudo Coder
Agent
MODULE ArithmeticLogicUnit (
INPUT: operand1 [31:0], operand2 [31:0], alu_control
[3:0],
OUTPUT: result [31:0], zero_flag [0:0], overflow_flag
[0:0]
)
REGISTERS:
reg [31:0] result // Result of the ALU operation
reg [0:0] zero_flag // Zero flag output
reg [0:0] overflow_flag // Overflow flag output
INITIALIZE:
result = 32’b0 // Initialize result to zero
...
ALWAYS @(operand1, operand2, alu_control):
1The complete interactive knowledge graph and detailed data structures can
be accessed at: https://sazzadsowmik.github.io/risc-v-32I-KG-demo/
// Step 1: Decode alu_control to determine operation
CASE (alu_control):
4’b0000: // ADD operation
result = operand1 + operand2
overflow_flag = (operand1[31] == operand2[31]) &&
(result[31] != operand1[31]) // Check for overflow
4’b0001: // SUB operation
.
.
.
DEFAULT:
result = 32’b0 // Default case, result is zero
overflow_flag = 1’b0 // No overflow for default case
// Step 6: Set zero_flag if result is zero
zero_flag = (result == 32’b0) ? 1’b1 : 1’b0
END MODULE
The Coder Agent then translates the pseudo-code into synthesizable RTL. It is guided to generate clean, synthesizerfriendly Verilog code that adheres to standard coding practices
and avoids tool-specific incompatibilities. The generated RTL
is intended to be compatible with downstream compilation
using Icarus Verilog and synthesis flows such as Yosys [15]
and OpenLane [16] for PPA evaluation.
Iterative Refinement. Each generated submodule is validated using the Syntax Checker Agent. If compilation fails,
the Prompt Enhancer Agent refines the generation using error
feedback. As described in Section III-D), only the latest full
code and error logs are retained, while earlier iterations are
summarized to reduce token usage.
Cost Analysis. We further analyze the computational cost
of the RV32I case study.
Listing 3: Cost summary (RV32I pipeline)
Architectural Analysis : $0.7174
Hierarchy Analysis Module : Negligible (skipped)
Progressive Coding : $0.0265
Total : $0.7439
Functional Correctness. We evaluate functional correctness using specification-driven testbenches applied to the
RV32I design. The generated processor successfully passes
all 183 test cases, including both submodule-level validation
and randomized arithmetic tests for the ALU, demonstrating
correct behavioral execution across key components.
B. Case Study: Other experiments
We also leverage three widely recognized cryptographic
standards from the NIST Federal Information Processing
Standards (FIPS): the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES)
[20], the Digital Signature Standard (DSS) [21], and the
Keyed-Hash Message Authentication Code (HMAC) [22]. By
utilizing these diverse benchmarks, we provide an exhaustive
evaluation of our tool across a variety of complex hardware
design tasks. Their specification documents vary in size and
structure, spanning 52 pages with 5 sections, 15 figures, and
8 tables for AES, 86 pages with 7 sections, 4 figures, and 4
tables for DSS, and 13 pages with 6 sections, 1 figure, and 1
table for HMAC.
These results demonstrate that the staged generation approach not only produces structurally consistent RTL but also
maintains low computational cost through efficient iterative refinement. The code will be open on GitHub upon publication.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Evaluation Metrics. We evaluate pipeline effectiveness using two metrics: (1) Intervention, defined as the total number
of human fixes required across both simulation and synthesis
to achieve syntactically correct RTL — counted per module
and reported as the highest fix count observed across all
modules in the design; and (2) Coding, defined as the average
number of code generation and revision iterations required per
submodule, capturing the efficiency and convergence behavior
of the Progressive Coding Module. Note that Spec2RTL-Agent
[5] does not report intervention at per-module granularity; for
a fair comparison we align our reported intervention figure to
their definition by taking the per-module maximum.
TABLE I: PERFORMANCE COMPARISON: VERIGRAPHI VS. SPEC2RTL [5] (LOWER
IS BETTER).
RISC-V-32I DSS HMAC AES
Metric VG S2R VG S2R VG S2R VG S2R
Intervention 2 – 6 6 0 3 8 4
Coding 1.11 – 2.60 9.31 1.14 9.52 3.00 8.49
VG: VeriGraphi (Ours), S2R: Spec2RTL-Agent
Synthesizability Validation. We first use Yosys to confirm
that the generated RTL is synthesizable. For designs that pass
this check, we run the full OpenLane flow, which performs
RTL-to-layout implementation using Yosys/OpenROAD-based
tools under the SkyWater open PDK sky130A (nominal 130
nm). The results in TableII formally confirm that VeriGraphigenerated RTL is fully synthesizable through this standard
physical implementation flow, with reported area, cell count,
critical path, and power metrics obtained from the final flow.
TABLE II: SYNTHESIS RESULTS AND PHYSICAL METRICS.
Design Area
(mm²)
Total
cells
Clk
(ns)
CP
(ns)
Power
(mW)
RISC-V32I 0.3600 35,867 10.0 4.40 0.9000268
HMAC 0.0784 7,168 10.0 1.39 1.4110073
DSS 0.0784 6,933 10.0 1.23 4.9500000
AES 4.0000 481,941 40.0 32.1 5,687.1020
CP: Critical Path.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
In this work, we presented a structured, knowledge graphdriven pipeline for translating unstructured specification documents into synthesizable RTL. By introducing a spec-anchored
Hierarchical Design Architecture and a progressive multiagent generation flow, VeriGraphi improves structural consistency, reduces hallucinated interfaces, and enables reliable
generation of hierarchical Verilog designs. We further validate
the generated RTL through specification-driven functional
testing, synthesis, and PPA evaluation, and show successful
generation of complex designs such as RISC-V with minimal
human intervention and HMAC with zero intervention, while
requiring substantially fewer coding iterations than prior work.
The hierarchical structure also brings practical efficiency benefits: local errors can be corrected without regenerating unrelated modules, and intermediate outputs from each stage are
preserved as checkpoints, avoiding restarts from the beginning
of the pipeline.
As future work, we plan to extend VeriGraphi in three
directions. First, we aim to introduce a Global Code Library as
a unified graph-based memory for reusable verified modules
across designs. Second, we will evaluate the framework on
more complex hierarchical designs beyond RISC-V. Third, we
plan to add extra constraints and optimization objectives to
improve generation quality and implementation results.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We acknowledge the assistance of Marwan Abdelwahab in
streamlining the synthesis and evaluation workflow.
This work is supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grant No. 2434247. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
funding agencies.
REFERENCES
[1] X. Hou, Y. Zhao, Y. Liu, Z. Yang, K. Wang, L. Li, X. Luo,
D. Lo, J. Grundy, and H. Wang, “Large language models for software
engineering: A systematic literature review,” 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.10620
[2] M. Rahman, S. Khatoonabadi, and E. Shihab, “Beyond synthetic
benchmarks: Evaluating llm performance on real-world class-level code
generation,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26130
[3] J. Tang, J. Qin, K. Thorat, C. Zhu-Tian, Y. Cao, Y. K. Zhao, and C. Ding,
“Hivegen–hierarchical llm-based verilog generation for scalable chip
design,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on LLM-Aided Design
(ICLAD). IEEE, 2025, pp. 30–36.
[4] G. Yang, W. Zheng, X. Chen, D. Liang, P. Hu, Y. Yang, S. Peng,
Z. Li, J. Feng, X. Wei, K. Sun, D. Ma, H. Cheng, Y. Shen, X. Hu,
T. Y. Zhuo, and D. Lo, “Large language model for verilog code
generation: Literature review and the road ahead,” 2025. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.00020
[5] Z. Yu, M. Liu, M. Zimmer, Y. Celine, Y. Liu, and H. Ren, “Spec2rtlagent: Automated hardware code generation from complex specifications
using llm agent systems,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on
LLM-Aided Design (ICLAD). IEEE, 2025, pp. 37–43.
[6] A. Nakkab, S. Q. Zhang, R. Karri, and S. Garg, “Rome was not built
in a single step: Hierarchical prompting for llm-based chip design,”
in Proceedings of the 2024 ACM/IEEE International Symposium on
Machine Learning for CAD, 2024, pp. 1–11.
[7] Y. Bai, G. B. Hamad, S. Suhaib, and H. Ren, “Assertionforge: Enhancing
formal verification assertion generation with structured representation of
specifications and rtl,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on LLMAided Design (ICLAD). IEEE, 2025, pp. 85–92.
[8] H. Yang, X. Zhao, Y. Liu, Z. Zou, K. Lyu, C. Zhou, Y. Zhu, and
J. Hao, “Automating hardware design and verification from architectural papers via a neural-symbolic graph framework,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2511.06067, 2025.
[9] T. Jayanth, R. Saravanan, and P. D. Sai Manoj, “Verirag:
A knowledge graph-augmented rag for verilog and assertion
generation,” in IEEE/ACM ASP-DAC, 2026. [Online]. Available:
Paper=https://mason.gmu.edu/∼rsaravan/papers/VeriRAG.pdfURL=
https://mason.gmu.edu/∼rsaravan/projects/VeriRAG/VeriRAG.html
[10] Google, “NotebookLM,” https://notebooklm.google, 2024, accessed:
2024-02-18.
[11] X. Wang, G.-W. Wan, S.-Z. Wong, L. Zhang, T. Liu, Q. Tian, and J. Ye,
“Chatcpu: An agile cpu design and verification platform with llm,” in
Proceedings of the 61st ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference, ser.
DAC ’24. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3649329.3658493
[12] OpenROAD Project, “Openroad project: Toward autonomous ic design,”
https://theopenroadproject.org/, 2025.
[13] S. Williams, “Icarus verilog,” https://steveicarus.github.io/iverilog/,
2026, open-source Verilog compiler and simulator.
[14] Anthropic, “Claude Sonnet 4.6,” February 2026, accessed: 2026-04-14.
[Online]. Available: https://www.anthropic.com/claude/sonnet
[15] C. Wolf, “Yosys open synthesis suite,” https://yosyshq.net/yosys/.
[16] Various, “Openlane 2: Making the most popular open source
asic implementation flow,” WOSet Workshop, 2024. [Online].
Available: https://woset-workshop.github.io/PDFs/2024/17 OpenLane
2 Making the Most .pdf
[17] A. Waterman, Y. Lee, D. A. Patterson, and K. Asanovic, “The ´
risc-v instruction set manual, volume i: User-level isa, version
2.1,” EECS Department, University of California, Berkeley, Tech.
Rep. UCB/EECS-2016-118, May 2016. [Online]. Available: http:
//www2.eecs.berkeley.edu/Pubs/TechRpts/2016/EECS-2016-118.html
[18] Q. Wu, G. Bansal, J. Zhang, Y. Wu, B. Li, E. Zhu, L. Jiang, X. Zhang,
S. Zhang, J. Liu et al., “Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via
multi-agent conversations,” in First conference on language modeling,
2024.
[19] OpenAI, “Gpt-4o mini: advancing cost-efficient intelligence,” 2024,
accessed: 2024-07-18. [Online]. Available: https://openai.com/index/
gpt-4o-mini-advancing-cost-efficient-intelligence/
[20] National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), “Advanced
encryption standard (aes),” U.S. Department of Commerce, Tech. Rep.
FIPS PUB 197, 2001. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.
FIPS.197
[21] ——, “Digital signature standard (dss),” U.S. Department of Commerce,
Tech. Rep. FIPS PUB 186-5, 2023. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.6028/NIST.FIPS.186-5
[22] ——, “The keyed-hash message authentication code (hmac),” U.S.
Department of Commerce, Tech. Rep. FIPS PUB 198-1, 2008. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.FIPS.198-1